[Return to the Table of Contents](https://github.com/brandon-rhodes/fopnp#readme)

# The Network Playground

To help readers of *Foundations of Python Network Programming* who want
to explore client and server programming on a network where they have
complete control and can capture packets wherever they wish, I have
created 5 Docker images together with a script that configures them as a
12-machine network that roughly resembles the Internet in miniature.

  * Four hosts `h1`, `h2`, `h3`, and `h4` represent the machines you
    might use at home or in a coffee shop.

  * The hosts live behind `modemA` and `modemB` that do network address
    translation (NAT) so that only outbound connections can be made to
    the rest of the network.

  * The modems connect to the rest of the world through routers `isp`
    and `backbone`.

  * On the other side of the world is the `example.com` machine room
    whose gateway named `example` serves three machines `ftp`, `mail`,
    and `www`.  These servers can be reached either using the short
    version of their name like `ftp` or a fully qualified name like
    `ftp.example.com`.

<img src="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/brandon-rhodes/fopnp/m/diagrams/playground.png">

The network services running on the machines are:

  * On every host
    * SSH — port 22
  * `backbone`
    * DNS — port 53
  * `ftp.example.com`
    * FTP — port 21
    * Telnet — port 23
  * `mail.example.com`
    * SMTP — port 25
    * POP3 — port 110
    * POP3S — port 995
    * IMAP — port 143
    * IMAPS — port 993
  * `www.example.com`
    * HTTP — port 80
    * HTTPS — port 443

You can verify that these ports are open by connecting to them
individually or else by running `nmap` — which is available on every
machine in the network — against one of the other hosts.

## Launching the Playground

The network playground is a Vagrant box that, after you have Vagrant
installed and running on your platform, you can download and run by
typing::

    vagrant init brandon-rhodes/playground
    vagrant up --provider virtualbox
    vagrant ssh

Note that you will need both [Vagrant](https://www.vagrantup.com/) and
[VirtualBox](https://www.virtualbox.org/wiki/Downloads) installed, and
that only versions of Vagrant 1.7.3 or later can support the new 5.x
version of VirtualBox — so if your Vagrant version is a bit behind, then
be sure to install a 4.x VirtualBox instead of the latest version.

Once you are inside of the Vagrant image, which is an Ubuntu 14.04 LTS
system with Docker installed, you can start up the playground and
connect to any of the four machines `h1` through `h4` to start
exploring:

    vagrant@vagrant-ubuntu-vivid-64:~$ ./launch.sh
    vagrant@vagrant-ubuntu-vivid-64:~$ ssh h1

    root@h1:~# traceroute www.example.com

    traceroute to www.example.com (10.130.1.4), 30 hops max, 60 byte packets
     1  192.168.1.1 (192.168.1.1)  0.294 ms  0.167 ms  0.183 ms
     2  isp (10.25.1.1)  1.002 ms  0.220 ms  0.218 ms
     3  backbone (10.1.1.1)  0.358 ms  0.259 ms  0.256 ms
     4  example.com (10.130.1.1)  0.500 ms  0.286 ms  0.355 ms
     5  www.example.com (10.130.1.4)  0.722 ms  0.662 ms  0.475 ms

    root@h1:~# ping -c1 www.example.com

    64 bytes from www.example.com (10.130.1.4): icmp_seq=1 ttl=60 time=1.17 ms

    root@h1:~# nmap mail.example.com

    Nmap scan report for mail.example.com (10.130.1.3)
    Host is up (0.000027s latency).
    Not shown: 994 closed ports
    PORT    STATE SERVICE
    22/tcp  open  ssh
    25/tcp  open  smtp
    110/tcp open  pop3
    143/tcp open  imap
    993/tcp open  imaps
    995/tcp open  pop3s

    Nmap done: 1 IP address (1 host up) scanned in 1.72 seconds

    root@h1:~# ssh www

    Welcome to Ubuntu 14.04 LTS (GNU/Linux 3.19.0-25-generic x86_64)

    root@www:~# route -n

    Kernel IP routing table
    Destination     Gateway         Genmask         Flags Metric Ref    Use Iface
    0.0.0.0         10.130.1.1      0.0.0.0         UG    0      0        0 eth0
    10.130.1.0      0.0.0.0         255.255.255.0   U     0      0        0 eth0

All of the hosts in the playground should have the *Foundations of
Python Network Programming* repository mounted under “/fopnp” and should
allow you to login as either the user `brandon` or `root` with either
SSH keys or the password `abc123`.

## Building the Playground

If you want to build the playground yourself instead of using the
pre-packaged virtual machine image:

  * Log in to an existing 64-bit Linux machine, or else install one
    inside of a vitalization tool like VirtualBox.  Install both
    [Docker](https://www.docker.com/) and the `git` version control
    command.  If instead of a general-purpose Linux like Ubuntu Server
    you use [boot2docker](https://github.com/boot2docker/boot2docker),
    then Docker will already be up and running once you boot and `git`
    will already be installed.

  * Add your user to the `docker` group so you have permission to create
    and configure Docker containers.

        $ sudo adduser your_own_username docker

  * Use `git` to check out the `fopnp` repository from GitHub:

        $ git clone https://github.com/brandon-rhodes/fopnp.git
        $ cd fopnp/playground

  * Build the five Docker images.  You will need `sudo` access to the
    root account to perform this step as well as the following step,
    because they involve creating and configuring network interfaces.

        $ ./build.sh

  * Start the images and configure the network fabric between them.
    This script is currently designed for use on boot2docker, and might
    require adjustment before it will run under another distribution.

        $ ./launch.sh

Once the above steps are completed, you should be able to get a root
prompt on any of the machines by using the `play.sh` script.

    $ ./play.sh h1

    root@h1:/# pwd
    /

    root@h1:/# traceroute www.example.com
    traceroute to www.example.com (10.130.1.4), 30 hops max, 60 byte packets
     1  192.168.1.1 (192.168.1.1)  0.294 ms  0.167 ms  0.183 ms
     2  isp (10.25.1.1)  1.002 ms  0.220 ms  0.218 ms
     3  backbone (10.1.1.1)  0.358 ms  0.259 ms  0.256 ms
     4  example.com (10.130.1.1)  0.500 ms  0.286 ms  0.355 ms
     5  www.example.com (10.130.1.4)  0.722 ms  0.662 ms  0.475 ms
